Update 15.biological-interpretation.md (#67)
jessegmeyerlab/proteomics-tutorial: content/15.biological-interpretation.md

Therefore, researchers will oftentimes be asked by scientific journals to provide independent orthogonal validation of their proteomics data and not performing such can be a major roadblock in the publication process. 

The aim of validating data obtained by proteomics approaches should always be two-fold by demonstrating that the conclusions arrived at by proteomics data acquisition and analysis are, firstly, valid and, secondly, relevant.
Depending on the question at hand, researchers can draw on an overabundance of techniques to validate MS-derived hypotheses in appropriate cellular, organismal or in vitro models.
In the the following paragraphs we aim to present only a high-level, stringent, non-exhaustive selection of orthogonal validation approaches and emphasise the importance of implementing assays that challenge assumptions gained from proteomics data analysis pipelines.

Before embarking on orthogonal validation of any hit, the success of the experiment should be established by assessing (internal) positive controls. 

> Internal positive controls can be proteins whose behaviour under the experimental conditions applied can be deduced a priory from prior knowledge (i.e. the scientific literature or public databases [see section **‘Databases’**]). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal positive controls can be proteins whose behaviour under the experimental conditions applied can be deduced from prior knowledge (i.e. the scientific literature or public databases). 
```

I don't think we have a section covering information databases yet unfortunately

Once the expected changes in internal controls have been confirmed by computational analysis (see the above section), the orthogonal experimental validation of novel, perhaps unexpected findings can begin.   

Orthogonal validation of new insights obtained from quantitative proteomics experiments can be a very time-consuming process and often requires familiarity with techniques not directly related to proteomics workflows. 
Given these challenges, the method(s) of choice warrant(s) careful consideration and is highly context-dependent.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Importantly, proteomics experiments in one way or another generally yield comprehensive lists of potentially interesting candidate proteins or pathways, the researcher will have to shortlist candidates to be taken forward to the validation stage of the project. 
Which candidates should you validate by an orthogonal approach and which ones might not require further validation?

In general, candidates representing abundant proteins that show high sequence coverage and are detected with high confidence might not necessarily need extensive orthogonal validation when compared with proteins of intermediate to low abundance that might be more challenging to faithfully quantify by proteomics alone (i.e. many membrane proteins or transcription factors). 

> Similarly, since the proteome is rarely comprehensively quantified in any single proteomics experiment, POIs that are critical for an observed biological change might not be part of the dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, since the proteome is rarely comprehensively quantified in any single proteomics experiment, proteins of interest (POIs) that are critical for an observed biological change might not be part of the dataset. 
```

> In these cases, additional, targeted analyses drawing on the vast repertoire of cell biology and biochemistry techniques might help to support or discredit proteomics-based hypotheses. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these cases, additional, targeted analyses might help to support or discredit proteomics-based hypotheses. 
```

Validation techniques are as manifold as biological questions and discussions thereof may easily fill multiple textbooks. 
The following sections are therefore merely meant to paint with a broad brush stroke a picture of useful methodolgies with which to validate and follow up MS-data derived observations. 
As this is meant to orient the reader, whereever possible, we will explicitly point out useful literature reviews for a deeper dive into each of these techniques. 

### General considerations 

Once POIs have been selected based on prior agreed-upon selection criteria (i.e. (adjusted) p value and/or fold change thresholds), orthogonal validation experiments should ideally be conducted under physiologically relevant conditions to mitigate artifical and misleading outcomes. 
Therefore, in vitro experiments, while useful to isolate and dissect particular aspects of a biological system, can give highly artificial results as conditions are far removed from the POI's native environment. 

> To investigate the biological function of a protein or pathway, direct genetic manipulation of the biological system at hand (e.g. modulating the expression of a POI by overexpression or knockout-/down experiments) can be minimally invasive when performed correctly and preserve the system in a near-native state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To investigate the biological function of a protein or pathway, direct genetic manipulation of the biological system at hand (e.g. modulating the expression of a POI by overexpression or knockout-/down experiments) can be minimally invasive when performed correctly.
```

> To this purpose, a variety of powerful and streamlined technologies exist (i.e. CRISPR/Cas-mediated knock-in/-out, RNAi-mediated knockdown, plasmid-based transient and constitutive overexpression etc) and their advantages, caveats and suitability for the model system at hand should be carefully considered. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
redundant with below

> For instance, should the POI be encoded by an essential gene, by definition, a complete and stable knockout might not be advisable due to it's critical role in maintaining cellular viability and proliferation ([@DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1131] for an overview of essential genes across multiple kingdoms of life, @DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.017). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should the POI be encoded by an essential gene, by definition, a complete and stable knockout might not be advisable [@DOI:10.1093/nar/gkt1131; @DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.017]. 
```

> In these extreme cases, attenuated expression (i.e. using RNA interference (RNAi) or controlled degradation (see below)) rather than complete repression of a GOI can be used to probe for protein function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these extreme cases, attenuated expression (i.e. using RNA interference (RNAi) or controlled degradation, see below) rather than complete repression of a gene can be used to probe for protein function. 
```

> Epitope tagging and/or exogenous expression of a GOI can be a powerful approach in assessing PPIs and investigating proteins of low abundance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Epitope tagging and/or exogenous expression of a gene of interest can be a powerful approach in assessing PPIs and investigating proteins of low abundance. 
```

However, overexpression artifacts are common [@DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2017.05.002]. 

It is not always possible to fully avoid the pleiotropic effects of protein (over-)expression or depletion, but a number of mitigation strategies (i.e. inducible expression, the use of multiple independent RNAi strategies) will be discussed below.

> Extensive biochemical characterisation of any overexpressed GOI is critical to ensure it closely reflects the functions of its endogenous counterpart and might involve assessing protein localisation (i.e. by imaging techniques such as microscopy and flow cytometry), protein abundance (i.e. by mass spectrometry or immunoblot analysis (see below)) and phenotypic assays, where applicable and practical. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensive biochemical characterization of any overexpressed gene is critical to ensure it closely reflects the functions of its endogenous counterpart. 
These assays might involve assessing protein localization (i.e. by imaging techniques such as microscopy and flow cytometry), protein abundance (i.e. by mass spectrometry or immunoblot analysis) and phenotypic assays where applicable and practical. 
```

### Functional genomics techniques in the validation of MS hits

Typical follow-up experiments to validate mass-spectrometry derived insights often involve the acute depletion or induction of a POI and assessing the impact on specific cellular phenotypes. 
Here we present a selection of methodologies to effectively modulate gene expression and discuss important considerations when planning functional genomics experiments for target validation. 

> Gene deletion or knockdown in particular, that is, the prevention of expressing a functional protein, is a powerful means to interrogate the role of one or more proteins in the phenotype(s) under investigation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gene deletion or knockdown to prevent production of a functional protein is a powerful means to interrogate the role of one or more proteins in the phenotype(s) under investigation. 
```

> To this end, well-established technologies deserving mention at this point are RNA interference (RNAi) in the form of siRNA/shRNA- or miRNA-mediated gene knockdown abd CRISPR/Cas9-or TALEN-mediated gene knockout [@DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.028]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To this end, well-established technologies deserving mention at this point are RNA interference (RNAi) in the form of siRNA/shRNA- or miRNA-mediated gene knockdown abd CRISPR/Cas9-or TALEN-mediated gene knockout [@DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.028]. 
```

Since each one of these technologies comes with their own unique advantages and caveats, the approach taken depends on the biological question at hand.

> Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas-based gene deletion technologies allow for the targeting of individual genes with relative ease, high efficiency and specificity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas-based gene deletion technologies allow for the targeting of individual genes with relative ease, high efficiency and specificity [@DOI:10.1126/science.1225829]. 
```

> When expressed in mammalian cells, the bacterially-derived Cas9 endonuclease can be guided with the help of a short guide RNA (gRNA) to a genomic location of interest, where it creates a DNA double strand break in a highly controlled manner (for a detailed discussion see [@DOI: 10.1007/s00294-019-01040-3]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When expressed in mammalian cells, the bacterially-derived Cas9 endonuclease can be guided with the help of a short guide RNA (gRNA) to a genomic location of interest, where it creates a DNA double strand break in a highly controlled manner (for a detailed discussion see [@DOI:10.1007/s00294-019-01040-3]).
```

The cell's DNA double-stand break repair machinery then introduces base pair insertions or deletions (indels) via non-homologous-end-joining (NHEJ), thus causing missense, and frameshift mutations (i.e. resulting in premaure stop codons), leading to premature termination of gene expression or non-functional, aberrant gene products.

> Similarly, the concomitant provision of a complementary DNA donor template encoding a desired gene modification (i.e. insertion of a stretch of DNA or base pair modification) will trigger homology-directed repair (HDR), resulting in gene knockin or base editing [@DOI: 10.1007/s00294-019-01040-3].     

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the concomitant provision of a complementary DNA donor template encoding a desired gene modification (i.e. insertion of a stretch of DNA or base pair modification) will trigger homology-directed repair (HDR), resulting in gene knockin or base editing [@DOI:10.1007/s00294-019-01040-3].     
Practical considerations of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knock-in and base editing will not be addressed in detail but are expertly discussed in [@DOI:10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120409], [@DOI:10.1007/s11427-021-2057-0], [@DOI:10.1007/s12033-022-00639-1], [@DOI:10.3390/genes14010129]. 
```

The relative ease-of-use and high efficiency of the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology has rendered it the method of choice for gene manipulation in many fields of cell biology. 

> However,it should be noted that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene deletion is not free from off-target effects ([@DOI: 10.3390/cells9071608] for advice on how to minimise these off-target effects). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However,it should be noted that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene deletion is not free from off-target effects ([@DOI:10.3390/cells9071608] for advice on how to minimise these off-target effects). 
```

Moreover, long-term depletion (or upregulation) of a POI itself can in some cases have dramatic systemic consequences and constitute an acute selection pressure leading to compensatory stress-induced adaptation that might obfuscate primary loss-of-function phenotypes and pose a substantial hurdle to the interpretability of biological data. 
As these compensatory mechanisms often manifest with time, controlled, transient genetic manipulation (gene depletion or transgene expression) is advised. 
Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown by transient transfection is typically achieved at shorter time frames (24 – 96h), depending on the turnover of the POI. 
On an even shorter time-scale, targeted, degron-based degradation systems enable depletion of a POI within minutes and further reduce off-target effects, but require the exogenous expression of a transgene and therefore some genetic manipulation. 

> A more comprehensive discussion of a selection of these systems (anchor-away, deGradFP, auxin-inducible degron (AID), dTAG technologies) and their advantages and potential pitfalls is presented in [@DOI: 10.3390/biology9120421]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more comprehensive discussion of a selection of these systems (anchor-away, deGradFP, auxin-inducible degron (AID), dTAG technologies) and their advantages and potential pitfalls is presented in [@DOI:10.3390/biology9120421]. 
```

Multiple eukaryotic and prokaryotic transcription-based systems have been developed that allow for the controlled biosynthesis or depletion of one or more POIs.
Amongst these, a popular and dependable choice for mammalian cells are tetracycline-controlled operon systems, which allow up- or downregulation of a POI in the presence of the antibiotic tetracycline or its derivative doxycycline. 
These systems rely on the insertion of a bacteria-derived Tet operon (TetO) between the promoter and coding sequence of a GOI. 
In this configuration, the TetO binds a co-expressed Tet-repressor protein blocking transcription the of GOI. 

> When tetracycline is added to the cells, the repressor then dissociates from the operon, thus de-repressing the GOI. Different variations of this potent system exist, allowing for more flexibility in experimental design. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When tetracycline is added to the cells, the repressor then dissociates from the operon, thus de-repressing the GOI. 
Different variations of this potent system exist, allowing for more flexibility in experimental design. 
```

> For instance, in the Tet-OFF system, the Tet repressor is fused to a eukaryotic transactivator (the chimeric fusion construct is termed tTA) and addition of tetracycline, or the related doxycycline, abolishes TetO binding and thus suppresses transcriptional activation [@DOI: 10.2174/1566523216666160524144041]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, in the Tet-OFF system, the Tet repressor is fused to a eukaryotic transactivator (the chimeric fusion construct is termed tTA) and addition of tetracycline, or the related doxycycline, abolishes TetO binding and thus suppresses transcriptional activation [@DOI:10.2174/1566523216666160524144041]. 
```

Alternatively, a mutant form of tTA (rtTA) binds the TetO only in the presence of tetracycline, allowing for tetracycline-induced gene expression. 

> For a detailed discussion of these systems, we refer the reader to a number of excellent reviews [@DOI: 10.3390/cells8080796].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a detailed discussion of these systems, we refer the reader to an excellent review [@DOI:10.3390/cells8080796].
```

> When generating stable expression cell lines, being able to precisely control the genomic integration site of the transgene reduces overall genetic heterogeneity in a cell  population and thereby reduces potential off-target/pleiotropic effects – both are important considerations in validation experiments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When generating stable expression cell lines, being able to precisely control the genomic integration site of the transgene reduces overall genetic heterogeneity in a cell population and thereby reduces potential off-target or pleiotropic effects.
```

> This ability is realised in the FlpIn-T-REx technology which harnesses Flp-recombinase mediated DNA recombination at a strictly defined genomic locus (the FRT site) [@DOI:  10.1016/B978-0-12-418687-3.00008-2]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ability is realised in the FlpIn-T-REx technology which harnesses Flp-recombinase mediated DNA recombination at a strictly defined genomic locus (the FRT site) [@DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-418687-3.00008-2]. 
```

> Site-directed isogenic integration of any GOI at the FRT site, which is under a tetracycline-inducible promoter and a hygromycin resistance gene, allows for facile generation of tetracycline/doxycycline-inducible isogeneic expression cell lines with minimal leaky expression (for an example, see [@DOI: 10.1007/978-1-61779-126-0_2 ]). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Site-directed isogenic integration of any GOI at the FRT site, which is under a tetracycline-inducible promoter and a hygromycin resistance gene, allows for facile generation of tetracycline/doxycycline-inducible isogeneic expression cell lines with minimal leaky expression (for an example, see [@DOI:10.1007/978-1-61779-126-0_2]). 
```

> Practical considerations of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knockin and base editing will not be addressed in detail but are expertly discussed in [@DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120409], [@DOI: 10.1007/s11427-021-2057-0], [@DOI: 10.1007/s12033-022-00639-1], [@DOI: 10.3390/genes14010129]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Validation and interpretation of protein abundance changes

To validate protein abundance changes observed by quantitative bottom-up proteomics or simply assess the success of targeted genetic manipulation as part of an orthogonal follow-up experiment (see above), the experimenter typically resorts to antibody-based techniques such as immunoblotting analysis or immunofluorescence and immunohistological imaging of POIs. 
The latter also allows for validation of protein expression and localisation in intact tissue or cells. 

> However, these semi-quantitative methods are commonly strongly influenced by the quality of the antibodies used and might not be sensitive enough to detect small changes in protein levels. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, these semi-quantitative methods are strongly influenced by the quality of the antibodies used and might not be sensitive enough to detect small changes in protein levels. 
```

In this case, more accurate orthogonal quantitation of proteins might be achieved by stable isotope labelling (SILAC/TMT/iTRAQ) and/or SRM/PRM (see section 'Experiment Types'). 
SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis are powerful and facile low-throughput tools to quickly validate protein abundance changes. 
However, short of introducing epitope tags to the endogenous POI, the success of immunoblotting is contingent on the availability of specific antibodies, which can present a formidable problem when investigating poorly characterised proteins or working with model organisms for which the commercial availability of specific antibodies is limited (this is particularly problematic for ‘unconventional’ or even well-establishedmodel organisms such as yeast). 

> A detailed discussion of the strengths and pitfalls of immunoblotting for validation of semi-quantitative proteomics data can be found in an excellent review by Handler et al [@DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201800222].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A detailed discussion of the strengths and pitfalls of immunoblotting for validation of semi-quantitative proteomics data can be found in an excellent review by Handler **et al.** [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.201800222].
```

Protein abundance changes detected in a proteomics experiment can be the result of a range of different cellular processes. 

> The abundance of a protein in a complex sample (e.g. cell lysate or biological fluid) directly reflects its intrinsic stability or expression levels under the conditions of interest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The abundance of a protein in a complex sample (e.g. cell lysate or biological fluid) directly reflects a combination of the protein's intrinsic stability and the translational rate under the conditions of interest. 
```

Both protein stability as well as gene expression activity can be quantified independently. 
Altered protein stability might be a direct consequence of specific or global changes in protein turnover. 

> Radioisotope labelling is a well-established, accurate way to monitor protein synthesis, maturation and turnover [@DOI: 10.1002/0471140864.ps3003s78], [@DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155028]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Radioisotope labelling is a well-established, accurate way to monitor protein synthesis, maturation and turnover [@DOI:10.1002/0471140864.ps3003s78], [@DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0155028]. 
```

> This ‘pulse-chase’ methodology relies on the incorporation (‘pulsing’) of radioisotopes (typically 35S-labelled cysteine and methionine) into de-novo synthesised proteins. Upon withdrawal of the labelleled amino acids from the culture medium, the decay of signal is monitored over time (‘the chase’) by SDS-PAGE and phosphoimaging, resulting in a temporal readout of protein abundances. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ‘pulse-chase’ methodology relies on the incorporation (‘pulsing’) of radioisotopes (typically 35S-labelled cysteine and methionine) into de-novo synthesised proteins. 
Upon withdrawal of the labelleled amino acids from the culture medium, the decay of signal is monitored over time (‘the chase’) by SDS-PAGE and phosphoimaging, resulting in a temporal readout of protein abundances. 
```

The advantage of this technology is that a subpopulation (newly synthesised proteins) can be monitored directly, giving an accurate assessment of protein stability. 
Once a change in protein stability has been validated, the underlying mechanisms can be addressed by inhibiting protein degradation pathways; prominently proteasome-mediated degradation (using specific proteasome inhibitors such as bortemzomib/velcade or MG132), autophagy (pharmacologically inhibiting autophagic flux) or degradation by proteases (using protease inhibitors). 

> The type of radiolabelling described above is relatively labour-intense, of low-throughput and has the obvious disadvantage of requiring radioactive material, which needs to be handled under strict safety precautions. Moreover, it critically depends on the presence of one or more methionines and/or cysteines in the POIs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type of radiolabeling described above is relatively labor-intense, of low-throughput and has the obvious disadvantage of requiring radioactive material, which needs to be handled under strict safety precautions. 
Moreover, it critically depends on the presence of one or more methionines and/or cysteines in the POIs. 
```

> It is also possible to measure protein stability within complex protein mixtures (i.e. cell lysates or biological fluids) using an array of specialised mass spectrometry techniques as discussed in [@DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00857] and  [@DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102225]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to measure protein stability within complex protein mixtures (i.e. cell lysates or biological fluids) using an array of specialized mass spectrometry techniques as discussed in [@DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00857] and  [@DOI:10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102225]. 
```

For purified proteins, well-established in vitro spectrometric and calorimetric methods such as circular dichroism, differential scanning calorimetry or differential scanning fluorometry can be used, but the relatively high sample amounts might be restrictive. 

> Finally, gene expression changes can also be determined with high fidelity using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) or RNA-Seq can measure changes in gene transcription or mRNA turnover (for an extensive discussion of both technologies, please see [@DOI: 10.21775/cimb.016.001] and [@DOI: 10.1038/nrg2484], respectively). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, gene expression changes can also be determined with high fidelity using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) or RNA-Seq can measure changes in gene transcription or mRNA turnover (for an extensive discussion of both technologies, please see [@DOI:10.21775/cimb.016.001] and [@DOI:10.1038/nrg2484], respectively). 
```

Therefore, any given protein can typically bind a range of interaction partners in a spatially and temporally restricted manner, thus forming complex PPI networks (the interactome of a protein). 
The method of choice to experimentally examine altered PPI states depends on the model system and biological question (i.e. purified proteins vs complex protein mixtures, monitoring of PPIs in live cells or cell lysate etc). 
Popular methods for the validation of PPIs in vivo include protein fragment complementation (split protein systems), 2-hybrid assays (mammalian, yeast and bacterial), proximity ligation, proximity labelling and FRET / BRET. 
Protein fragment complementation assays rely on the principle that the two self-associating halves of reporter proteins can be expressed in an inactive form but when in spatial proximity bind one another to complement the functional, active reporter. 

> When these split reporters are fused to two interacting proteins (so-called bait and prey proteins), the binding of bait to prey induces the spatial restriction needed to fully complement the reporter. Commonly used reporter complementation systems are split fluorescent proteins (i.e. GFP, YFP) [@DOI: 10.3390/ijms20143479], ubiquitin [@DOI: 10.1093/bfgp/1.3.230], luciferase [@DOI: 10.1007/s00216-014-7980-8], TEV protease [@DOI:  10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.06.012], beta-lactamase [@DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2022.111986], beta-galactosidase, Gal4, or DHFR [@DOI: 10.2174/1389203721666200213102829]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When these split reporters are fused to two interacting proteins (so-called bait and prey proteins), the binding of bait to prey induces the spatial restriction needed to fully complement the reporter. Commonly used reporter complementation systems are split fluorescent proteins (i.e. GFP, YFP) [@DOI:10.3390/ijms20143479], ubiquitin [@DOI:10.1093/bfgp/1.3.230], luciferase [@DOI:10.1007/s00216-014-7980-8], TEV protease [@DOI:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.06.012], beta-lactamase [@DOI:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2022.111986], beta-galactosidase, Gal4, or DHFR [@DOI:10.2174/1389203721666200213102829]. 
```

The resulting functional readout of these complementation system depends on which split reporter is used. 
In general, the split luciferase system shows enhanced sensitivity over fluorescence-based systems as background luminescence is low. 

Two-hybrid assays are based on a similar functional complementation strategy as fragment complementation systems. 
Conventionally, two self-complementing transcription factor fragments are fused to bait and prey proteins, respectively, leading to the restoration of a functional transcription factor only upon prey-bait interaction. 
The complemented transcription factor then induces the expression of a reporter gene that can be measured. 

> Multiple variations of this system abound for different model organisms, but they almost always involve transcriptional activation or repression of a reporter gene ([@DOI: 10.4149/gpb_2021035] for a detailed discussion). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple variations of this system abound for different model organisms, but they almost always involve transcriptional activation or repression of a reporter gene ([@DOI:10.4149/gpb_2021035] for a detailed discussion). 
```

> The yeast-2-hybrid system (Y2H) is deserving of mention here as it had been the very first 2-hybrid system established [@DOI: 10.1038/340245a0] and has ever since proven to be extremely versatile (multiple auxotrophic reporters and markers of phenotypic sensitivity available), cheap, lends itself to functional high-throughput screening and variants have been developed that allow for the investigation of membrane-protein interactions (i.e. membrane Y2H) [@DOI: 10.3390/ijms10062763], [@DOI: 10.4149/gpb_2021035]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The yeast-2-hybrid system (Y2H) is deserving of mention here as it had been the very first 2-hybrid system established [@DOI:10.1038/340245a0] and has ever since proven to be extremely versatile (multiple auxotrophic reporters and markers of phenotypic sensitivity available), cheap, lends itself to functional high-throughput screening and variants have been developed that allow for the investigation of membrane-protein interactions (i.e. membrane Y2H) [@DOI:10.3390/ijms10062763], [@DOI:10.4149/gpb_2021035]. 
```

Despite the many advantages the Y2H offers, critical drawbacks include the potential of misfolding of bait and prey proteins when fused to a complementation reporter, expression at non-physiological levels, the lack of control over posttranslational modifications that might be important for the PPI under investigation, and the potential requirement of kingdom- or species-specific folding factors for the bait/prey under investigation (i.e. when probing PPI of mammalian proteins in Y2H). 

> Principles of the Y2H technology have also been adapted to mammalian systems, which circumvent some of the aforementioned drawbacks of Y2H [@DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2020.01.022]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Principles of the Y2H technology have also been adapted to mammalian systems, which circumvent some of the aforementioned drawbacks of Y2H [@DOI:10.1016/j.drudis.2020.01.022]. 
```

Perhaps the most commonly applied method of detecting and validating PPIs in vitro is affinity purification (AP, also known as affinity chromatography) of co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) either coupled with SDS-PAGE/immunoblotting or mass spectrometry to determine the identity of interacting proteins. 
AP typically relies on the isolation of a transgenic POI by an epitope tag (using epitope-specific matrix-conjugated proteins (antibodies or epitope-binding proteins)), while Co-IP harnesses specific antibodies directly targeting the POI. 
Specific interactors are expected to be enriched compared to the negative control (i.e an isotype control antibody, a knockout cell line or empty matrix). 

> AP is not solely restricted to detecting PPIs, but can also be adapted to protein interactions with other biomolecules such as RNA [@DOI: 10.3390/ijms160922456]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AP is not solely restricted to detecting PPIs, but can also be adapted to protein interactions with other biomolecules such as RNA [@DOI:10.3390/ijms160922456]. 
```

It should be noted that AP and Co-IP can return multiple potential binding partners, many of which might be artefactual due to loss of cellular compartmentalisation during sample preparation. 

> To reduce the probability of such artefacts and increase the confidence of a specific interaction, reciprocal affinity purification (by pulldown of each interaction partner) or in situ imaging might be performed (i.e. using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) [@DOI: 10.1038/s41592-019-0530-8], split-protein systems [@DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.10.014], proximity ligation assay @DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-11049-1] and immunofluorescence microscopy). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce the probability of such artefacts and increase the confidence of a specific interaction, reciprocal affinity purification (by pulldown of each interaction partner) or in situ imaging might be performed (i.e. using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) [@DOI:10.1038/s41592-019-0530-8], split-protein systems [@DOI:10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.10.014], proximity ligation assay @DOI:10.1007/s00253-020-11049-1] and immunofluorescence microscopy). 
```

Forster and bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (FRET / BRET) can be used for in situ visualisation of protein proximities and therefore PPIs. 

> In FRET, non-radiative energy transfer between donor and receptor chromophores (each fused to prey and bait proteins, respectively), results in the emission of a characteristic fluorescence signal only when both prey and bait are in very close proximity (1-10 nm distance) and a suitable light source for donor excitation is provided [@DOI: 10.3390/ijms16046718]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In FRET, non-radiative energy transfer between donor and receptor chromophores (each fused to prey and bait proteins, respectively), results in the emission of a characteristic fluorescence signal only when both prey and bait are in very close proximity (1-10 nm distance) and a suitable light source for donor excitation is provided [@DOI:10.3390/ijms16046718]. 
```

> The underlying principle of BRET is similar to that of FRET but with the exception of using a chemical substrate which activates bioluminescent donor, such as luciferase, resulting in energy transfer to a fluorescent acceptor molecule [@DOI: 10.1038/nmeth841], [@DOI: 10.3390/mi13101789]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The underlying principle of BRET is similar to that of FRET but with the exception of using a chemical substrate which activates bioluminescent donor, such as luciferase, resulting in energy transfer to a fluorescent acceptor molecule [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth841], [@DOI:10.3390/mi13101789]. 
```

> The main advantages of BRET over FRET are independence from an external light source (which can result in photobleaching), but requires at least one of the POIs to be fused to the donor (while in FRET, donor and acceptor can be chemically conjugated to POI-specific antibodies) [@DOI: 10.1038/nmeth841]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main advantages of BRET over FRET are independence from an external light source (which can result in photobleaching), but requires at least one of the POIs to be fused to the donor (while in FRET, donor and acceptor can be chemically conjugated to POI-specific antibodies) [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth841]. 
```

> FRET can be particularly useful in investigating cell surface protein interactions when using specific antibodies conjugated to donor and acceptor probes as antibodies per se are not cell-permeable and therefore restricted to targets presented on the cell surface in the absence of membrane permeabilisation agents. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FRET can be particularly useful in investigating cell surface protein interactions when using specific antibodies conjugated to donor and acceptor probes as antibodies are not cell-permeable and therefore restricted to targets presented on the cell surface in the absence of membrane permeabilization agents. 
```

Other fluorescence-based PPI assays encompass Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS). 

> These methods use small volumes of fluorescently labelled proteins and can determine their diffusion coefficients, which change in when proteins form a complex [@DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2019.106218]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods use small volumes of fluorescently labelled proteins and can determine their diffusion coefficients, which change in when proteins form a complex [@DOI:10.1016/j.bpc.2019.106218]. 
```

> Proximity labelling methods (Proximity ligation and enzymatic proximity labelling (BirA*, APEX2, HRP) can surveil labile or transient interaction in live cells in a high-throughput format when coupled with target identification by MS [@DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2022.104620], [@DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2017.09.028]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proximity labelling methods (Proximity ligation and enzymatic proximity labelling (BirA*, APEX2, HRP) can surveil labile or transient interaction in live cells in a high-throughput format when coupled with target identification by MS [@DOI:10.1016/j.jprot.2022.104620], [@DOI:10.1016/j.jid.2017.09.028]. 
```

> These approaches harness a biotin ligase (i.e. BirA*, BioID2, AirID, BASU, APEX2, HRP) fused to a POI whose interactome is to be determined. In the presence of biotin (for BirA*, BioID2, AirID, BASU, APEX2 and HRP) or a biotin-phenol derivative (for APEX2), the biotin ligase will activate the biotin(-phenol) which then reacts with and covalently biotinylates any protein in close proximity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These approaches harness a biotin ligase (i.e. BirA, BioID2, AirID, BASU, APEX2, HRP) fused to a POI whose interactome is to be determined. In the presence of biotin (for BirA, BioID2, AirID, BASU, APEX2 and HRP) or a biotin-phenol derivative (for APEX2), the biotin ligase will activate the biotin(-phenol) which then covalently biotinylates any protein in close proximity. 
```

The activated biotin has a short half-life, ensuring that the effective labelling radius is typically restricted to approximately 10 nm. 
Biotinylated proteins are isolated by affinity purification with streptavidin-conjugated beads and identified by mass spectrometry or SDS-PAGE/immunoblotting. 
TurboID, miniTurboID and ultraID, promiscuous biotin ligases faster than BirA*, have been developed allowing for shorter treatment times and decreased background signal. 

> The choice of a biotin ligase variant depends on the POI and experimental setup, but in general HRP does not work in reducing, cytoplasmic environments, but is suitable for labelling proteins extracellular face of the plasma membrane or in the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice of a biotin ligase variant depends on the POI and experimental setup, but in general HRP does not work in cytoplasmic environments where conditions are chemically reducing, but is suitable for labelling proteins extracellular face of the plasma membrane or in the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus. 
```

> While TurboID and similar variants have fast kinetics, they can cause depletion of endogenous biotin and therefor cytotoxicity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While TurboID and similar variants have fast kinetics, they can cause depletion of endogenous biotin and therefore cytotoxicity. 
```

A major drawback shared by all variants described above is that they necessitate fusion to the POI, which might alter its physiological behaviour and give rise to false positives or false negatives.
Moreover, detecting a biotin-labelled protein does not unequivocally designate it as an interaction partner as spatial proximity to the POI-biotin ligase fusion protein without direct binding can result in biotinylation. 

> The inclusion of controls, such as expression of the biotinylating enzyme alone, is therefore particularly important for enzymatic proximity labelling methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inclusion of controls, such as expression of the biotinylating enzyme alone in the cellular compartment of interest, is therefore particularly important for enzymatic proximity labelling methods.
```

The in situ proximity ligation assay (PLA) combines the specificity of antibodies with the signal amplification capacity of a DNA polymerase reaction. 
Here, two antibodies, each conjugated to a short single-strand DNA (ssDNA) tag and each specific to one of the two proteins whose interaction is under investigation, are added to fixed cells or tissue. 
Once bound to their respective targets and only when in direct proximity, the addition of two connector oligonucleotides complementary to each tag ssDNA tag and phi29 DNA polymerase, triggers isothermal rolling circle amplification, eventually resulting in the generation of continuous stretches of repetitive DNA. 

> These DNA products can then be visualised by in situ hybridisation with fluorescently labelled oligonucleotides ([@DOI: 10.1007/82_2013_334] for a detailed discussion). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These DNA products can then be visualised by in situ hybridisation with fluorescently labelled oligonucleotides (see [@DOI:10.1007/82_2013_334] for a detailed discussion). 
```

PLA has the advantage of visualising the two interacting proteins in their native environment when high-resolution microscopy is used as a readout. 

> Chemical crosslinking (XL) of proteins can determine PPIs with amino-acid level resolution, and can thereby give valuable insights into the orientation of two or more proteins relative to one another [@DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2022.03.003]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chemical crosslinking (XL) of proteins can determine PPIs with amino-acid level resolution, and can thereby give valuable insights into the orientation of two or more proteins relative to one another [@DOI:10.1016/j.str.2022.03.003]. 
```

> Recent technical advances also enabled the visualisation of protein-RNA interaction [@DOI: 10.1042/EBC20220177]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recent technical advances also enabled the visualisation of protein-RNA interaction [@DOI:10.1042/EBC20220177]. 
```

> Various XL chemistries are available (amine-reactive, sulfhydryl and photoreactive crosslinkers; reversible vs irreversible) and cross-linked proteins detected by mass spectrometry [@DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2020.07.008]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various XL chemistries are available (amine-reactive, sulfhydryl and photoreactive crosslinkers; reversible vs irreversible) and cross-linked proteins detected by mass spectrometry [@DOI:10.1016/j.cbpa.2020.07.008]. 
```

In general, applying XL-MS to a mixture of interacting, purified proteins is preferable to in situ XL of complex protein mixtures (i.e. cell lysate) as detection and deconvolution of XL peptides is technically and computationally challenging.

> Surface plasmon resonance can accurately measure several key kinetics of PPIs with high accuracy (e.g. association and dissociation kinetics, stoichiometry, affinity) [@DOI: 10.1016/bs.apcsb.2017.07.003]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Surface plasmon resonance can accurately measure several key kinetics of PPIs with high accuracy (e.g. association and dissociation kinetics, stoichiometry, affinity) [@DOI:10.1016/bs.apcsb.2017.07.003]. 
```
